Release 10.0.0 (#14193)
gravitational/teleport: CHANGELOG.md

## 10.0.0

Teleport 10 is a major release that brings:

> 

Reviewer: Small thing, but should we put "Preview" in parentheses in these bullets/headings, e.g., "Passwordless (Preview)", to distinguish feature names from release statuses?

Author: Good call, I think we should.

* Passwordless Preview
* Resource Access Requests Preview
* Proxy Peering Preview
* IP-Based Restrictions Preview
* Automatic User Provisioning Preview
* Audit Logging for Microsoft SQL Server Database Access
* Snowflake Database Access Preview
* ElastiCache/MemoryDB Database Access Preview
* Teleport Connect for Server and Database Access Preview
* Machine ID Database Access Support Preview

### Passwordless Preview

Teleport 10 introduces passwordless support to your clusters. Any cluster with
WebAuthn configured automatically benefits from passwordless. To use
passwordless users may register a security key with resident credentials or use
a built-in authenticator, like Touch ID.

See https://goteleport.com/docs/access-controls/guides/passwordless/.

### Resource Access Requests Preview

Teleport 10 expands just-in-time access requests to allow for requesting access

> to specific resources, allowing users to request the least privileged access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to specific resources. This lets you grant users the least privileged access
```
To avoid two "allow" phrases in a row.

needed for their workflows.

> Just in time access requests are an enterprise-only feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just-in-time access requests are an enterprise-only feature.
```
Also, while I think "access requests" are lowercased throughout the docs, does the addition of "just-in-time" warrant making this a proper name (Just-in-Time Access Requests)?

### Proxy Peering Preview

> Teleport 9 and prior required reverse tunnel agents to maintain connections to

Reviewer: I don't think the docs really discuss the reverse tunnel agents, and I know the word "agent" has raised hackles in the past. Would it make sense to say "workers" (or something else) instead of "agents" here?

Author: We use "agent" terminology pretty extensively throughout the documentation so I'm not sure if there's a better word. "Workers" I think is actually more confusing.

> every proxy in the cluster. Teleport 10 introduces a new proxy peering mode that

Reviewer: I think we should use a more specific term than "proxy" in phrases like "every proxy in the cluster", as our docs sometimes use this to indicate the Proxy Service, an SNI/ALPN client proxy, or a non-Teleport proxy deployed on the user's infrastructure. Maybe "Proxy Service instance"?

> allows agents to connect to a single proxy. Client connections are routed to the

Reviewer: Does "agents" here refer to the reverse tunnel agents or to services like the Database Service, Application Service, etc.?

Teleport Connect is a graphical macOS application that simplifies access to your
Teleport resources. Teleport Connect 10 supports server and database access,
with other protocols coming in future.

Get Teleport Connect installer from the macOS tab on the downloads page:
https://goteleport.com/download/.

### Machine ID Database Access Support Preview

In Teleport 10 we’ve added database access support to Machine ID. Applications
can use Machine ID to access databases protected by Teleport.

You can find Machine ID guide for database access in the documentation:
https://goteleport.com/docs/machine-id/guides/databases/.

### Breaking Changes

Please familiarize yourself with the following potentially disruptive changes in
Teleport 10 before upgrading.

#### Auth server version check

Teleport 10 agents will now refuse to start if they detect that the auth server
is older than 1 major version apart. You can use --skip-version-check flag to
bypass version check.

Take a look at component compatibility guarantees in the documentation:
https://goteleport.com/docs/setup/operations/upgrading/#component-compatibility.

#### HTTP_PROXY for reverse tunnels

> Reverse tunnel connections will now respect HTTP_PROXY environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reverse tunnel connections will now respect `HTTP_PROXY` environment variables.
```

This may result in reverse tunnel agents not being able to re-establish
connections if the HTTP proxy is set in their environment and does not allow
connections to the Teleport proxy.

Refer to the following documentation section for more details:
https://goteleport.com/docs/setup/reference/networking/#http-connect-proxies.

#### New APT repos

With Teleport 10 we’ve migrated to new APT repositories that now support
multiple release channels, Teleport versions and OS distributions. The new
repositories have been backfilled with Teleport versions starting from 6.2.31
and we recommend upgrading to them. The old repositories will be maintained for
the foreseeable future.

See updated installation instructions:
https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/getting-started/#step-14-install-teleport-on-your-linux-host.

#### Removed “tctl access ls”

> The “tctl access ls” command that returned information about user server access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `tctl access ls` command that returned information about user server access
```

within the cluster was removed. Please use a previous tctl version if you’d like
to keep using it.

#### Relaxed session join permissions

In previous versions of Teleport users needed full access to a node/Kubernetes
pod in order to join a session. Teleport 10 relaxes this requirement. Joining

> sessions remains deny-by-default but now only “join_policy” statements are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sessions remains deny-by-default but now only `join_policy` statements are
```

checked for session join RBAC.

See moderated sessions guide for more details:
https://goteleport.com/docs/access-controls/guides/moderated-sessions/.

> #### Github connectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### GitHub connectors
```

> Github connector’s “teams_to_logins” field is deprecated in favor of the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GitHub authentication connector’s `teams_to_logins` field is deprecated in favor of the new
```

> “teams_to_roles” field. The old field will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`teams_to_roles` field. The old field will be removed in a future release.
```

#### Teleport FIPS AWS endpoints

Teleport 10 will now automatically use FIPS endpoints for AWS S3 and DynamoDB

> when started with --fips flag. You can use the “use_fips_endpoint=false”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when started with the `--fips` flag. You can use the `use_fips_endpoint=false`
```

connection endpoint option to use regular endpoints for Teleport in FIPS mode,
for example:

> s3://bucket/path?region=us-east-1&use_fips_endpoint=false

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
s3://bucket/path?region=us-east-1&use_fips_endpoint=false
```
````

> See S3/DynamoDB backends documentation for more information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the S3/DynamoDB backends documentation for more information:
```

https://goteleport.com/docs/setup/reference/backends/#s3.

> ## 8.0.0

Reviewer: The changelog appears to be missing releases between 8.0.0 and 10.0.0

Author: Yeah this is an artifact of the fact that 9.0 changelogs are only updated in branch/v9. I think we have an issue somewhere to fix this.

## 10.0.0

Teleport 10 is a major release that brings:

* Passwordless (Preview)
* Resource Access Requests (Preview)
* Proxy Peering (Preview)
* IP-Based Restrictions (Preview)
* Automatic User Provisioning (Preview)
* Audit Logging for Microsoft SQL Server Database Access
* Snowflake Database Access (Preview)
* ElastiCache/MemoryDB Database Access (Preview)
* Teleport Connect for Server and Database Access (Preview)

> * Machine ID Database Access Support (Preview)

Reviewer 2: Nit: can we split these by product? IMO, it will add readability.

E.g.

Platform Features:

- Passwordless Registration and Login (Preview)
- Resource Access Requests (Preview)
- Proxy Peering (Preview)

Server Access Features:
- IP-Baesd Restrictions (Preview)
- Automatic User Provisioning (Preview)

etc.

### Passwordless (Preview)

Teleport 10 introduces passwordless support to your clusters. Any cluster with

> WebAuthn configured automatically benefits from passwordless. To use

Reviewer 2: > Any cluster with WebAuthn configured automatically benefits from passwordless.

I don't actually think this is true because admins have to turn on passwordless as an authentication method.

passwordless users may register a security key with resident credentials or use
a built-in authenticator, like Touch ID.

See https://goteleport.com/docs/access-controls/guides/passwordless/.

### Resource Access Requests (Preview)

Teleport 10 expands just-in-time access requests to allow for requesting access
to specific resources. This lets you grant users the least privileged access
needed for their workflows.

> Just-in-time access requests are an enterprise-only feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just-in-time access requests is only available in Teleport Enterprise Edition.
```

### Proxy Peering (Preview)

Teleport 9 and prior required reverse tunnel agents to maintain connections to
every Proxy Service instance in the cluster. Teleport 10 introduces a new proxy
peering mode that allows agents to connect to a single Proxy. Client connections
are routed to the correct Proxy Service instance regardless of the one they
originally connected to.

> Proxy peering is an enterprise-only feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Proxy peering is only available in Teleport Enterprise Edition
```

### IP-Based Restrictions (Preview)

Teleport 10 introduces a new role option to pin the source IP in SSH
certificates. When enabled, the source IP that was used to request certificates
is embedded in the certificate, and SSH servers will reject connection attempts
from other IPs. This protects against attacks where valid credentials are
exfiltrated from disk and copied out into other environments.

> IP-based restrictions are available in Teleport Enterprise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IP-based restrictions is only available in Teleport Enterprise Edition
```

### Automatic User Provisioning (Preview)

Teleport 10 can be configured to automatically create Linux host users upon
login without having to use Teleport's PAM integration. Users can be added to specific
Linux groups and assigned appropriate “sudoer” privileges.

To learn more about configuring automatic user provisioning read the guide:
https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/host-user-creation/.

### Audit Logging for Microsoft SQL Server Database Access

Teleport 9 introduced a preview of Database Access support for Microsoft SQL
Server which didn’t include audit logging of user queries. Teleport 10 captures
users' queries and prepared statements and sends them to the audit log, similarly
to other supported database protocols.

> 

Reviewer 2: It's worth mentioning that Microsoft SQL Server remains in preview.

authentication: https://goteleport.com/docs/database-access/guides/sql-server-ad/.

### Snowflake Database Access (Preview)

Teleport 10 brings support for Snowflake to Database Access. Administrators can
set up access to Snowflake databases through Teleport for their users with
standard Database Access features like role-based access control and audit
logging, including query activity.

Connect your Snowflake database to Teleport following this guide:
https://goteleport.com/docs/database-access/guides/snowflake/.

### Elasticache/MemoryDB Database Access (Preview)

Teleport 9 added Redis protocol support to Database Access. Teleport 10 improves
this integration by adding native support for AWS-hosted Elasticache and
MemoryDB, including auto-discovery and automatic credential management in some
deployment configurations.

Learn more about it in this guide:
https://goteleport.com/docs/database-access/guides/redis-aws/.

### Teleport Connect for Server and Database Access (Preview)

Teleport Connect is a graphical macOS application that simplifies access to your
Teleport resources. Teleport Connect 10 supports Server Access and Database Access,

> with other protocols coming in the future.

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning that Windows support is coming in the future as well.
